Beckman Coulter, Inc. is an American company that develops, manufactures, and markets products relevant to biomedical testing. It has been a subsidiary of Danaher Corporation since 2011. It operates in the industries of diagnostics under the brand name Beckman Coulter and life sciences under the brand name Beckman Coulter Life Sciences. The company was established in 1935 as National Technical Laboratories, and has become an international company through growth and acquisitions of other life sciences organizations.
The company employs over 12,000 people, with $5.8 billion in annual sales by 2017. It is currently headquartered in Brea, California. Beckman Coulter was acquired by Danaher Corporation in 2011.

History
The company was founded by Caltech professor Arnold O. Beckman in 1935 as National Technical Laboratories to commercialize a pH meter that he had invented.
In the 1940s, the name was changed the name to Arnold O. Beckman, Inc. to sell oxygen analyzers, the Helipot precision potentiometer, and spectrophotometers. The company name changed to Beckman Instruments, Inc. before going public in 1952.
In the 1950s, Beckman Instruments developed the EASE series of analog computers, two of which were used by NASA in the 1960s for real-time simulation during the development of the Apollo Guidance Computer.
In 1954, Beckman Instruments acquired ultracentrifuge maker Spinco (Specialized Instruments Corp.). The Spinco division went on to design and manufacture a broad range of laboratory centrifuges.
In 1961, Beckman acquired Offner Electronics, a company founded by inventor Franklin F. Offner.
In 1982, the company merged into SmithKline to form SmithKline Beckman, with Arnold Beckman as vice chairman, but regained its independence in 1989 after SmithKline merged with Beecham Group to form SmithKline Beecham (now part of GlaxoSmithKline).
In 1995, the company acquired Hybritech, Inc. from Eli Lilly.
In 1996, the company acquired the Sanofi portion of Sanofi Pasteur Diagnostics.
In 1998, the company acquired Coulter Corporation, a company founded by Wallace H. Coulter, the inventor of the Coulter counter. The merged company became Beckman Coulter.
By 2003, the company has more than 200,000 systems operating in laboratories around the world.
In 2005, the company acquired Diagnostic Systems Laboratories (DSL) based in Webster, Texas.
In 2006, the company acquired Lumigen and Agencourt Bioscience.
In 2007, the company acquired the Flow Cytometry Business Group of Dako North America, Inc.
In 2009, the company acquired Lab-based Diagnostics business of Olympus Corporation Japan. That same year, the company moved its world headquarters from Fullerton, California to the newly renovated facility in Brea.
In February 2011, Danaher announced that it has entered into a definitive merger agreement with Beckman Coulter. On June 30, 2011, Danaher finalized the acquisition of Beckman Coulter.
On September 12, 2012, Danaher acquired Iris Diagnostics and its parent company IRIS International, Inc. as leader in Urinalysis Diagnostic to further boost Danaher's Diagnostic business within Beckman Coulter. Subsequently, the business was divided into two operating companies within Danaher; Beckman Coulter focused on diagnostics segments and Beckman Coulter Life Sciences focused on biomedical research and development segments.
On February 1, 2015, the company finalized the acquisition of MicroScan from Siemens Healthcare.
On January 3, 2019, Beckman Coulter Life Sciences announced the acquisition of Labcyte, Inc., a privately held manufacturer of acoustic liquid handlers.
On May 2, 2019, Beckman Coulter Life Sciences finalized their acquisition of EDC Biosciences, a privately held manufacturer of acoustic liquid handlers.

References
External links
Beckman Coulter Diagnostics
Beckman Coulter Life Sciences
Yahoo! - Beckman Coulter, Inc. Company Profile
Beckman Historical Collection Science History Institute Digital Collections (Digitized corporate records of Beckman Coulter, Incorporated, as well as personal papers of American scientist and industrialist Arnold Orville Beckman)