The Chassidim Shul, also known as the Chabad House, is a former Hasidic Jewish congregation and synagogue in Yeoville, Johannesburg, in the district of Gauteng, South Africa. It is in the Savoy Estate.

History
The cornerstone was laid in 1963 by Mr Henry Jacobson, in memory of his parents, long-standing members of the Chassidic community. The building committee included Rabbi Aloy, obm, Mr Shaul Bacher, obm, Mr Mitzie Yachad and others. The Shul was finished about a year later. 
The synagogue was completed in 1963 and designed by the firm of Morgensten & Morgensten, the husband and wife team of Jacques Morgenstern and Riva Morgenstern. They met at the University of the Witwatersrand in the Department of Architecture in the 1940s and ran a successful and award-winning architectural practice in Johannesburg.
The Chassidim Shul served as a place of worship and study and other activities of Chabad-Lubavitch. It was famous for its Shabbat farbrengens and extraordinary Chassidic joy and dancing on Simchat Torah.
In retrospect “that little shul in Yeoville” has proven to be a powerful engine that changed the face of Jewish South Africa. It brought Yiddishkeit, Lubavitch and the Rebbe into the hearts of literally thousands of Jews through the establishment of more than a dozen Chabad shuls in Johannesburg, Natal and the Cape.
With the change in demographics in Yeoville, the building is no longer in use as a synagogue. The congregation worships from a synagogue located at 27 Aintree Avenue, in the Savoy Estate of Johannesburg.

Design
It is notable externally for its vigorous, sculptural nature. The roof is a heavy V-shape protecting the simple shape of the building which consists of an enclosure by screens of different density and transparency – warm-coloured stone and modelled grilles and facings in terrazzo by the sculptor Edoardo Villa.
The mystic lions of brass and bronze over the Holy Ark inside the building were also by Villa but these have since be removed. Villa worked on a number of Morgenstern and Morgenstern's other buildings.

See also
History of the Jews in South Africa
List of synagogues in South Africa

References
External links
 Media related to Chassidim Shul, Yeoville at Wikimedia Commons