The Chihuahua (or Spanish: Chihuahueño) is a Mexican breed of toy dog. It is named for the Mexican state of Chihuahua and is one of the smallest dog breeds in the world. It is usually kept as a companion animal.

History
DNA studies suggest that native American dogs entered North America from Siberia approximately 10,000 years ago, and were then isolated from other breeds for some 9,000 years until the arrival of the first Europeans; these pre-contact dogs exhibited a unique genetic signature that is now almost gone. A study based on sequencing of ancient dog genomes, published in 2020, suggests that this pre-colonial ancestry survives in two Mexican breeds, to the extent of about 4% in the Chihuahua (and some 3% in the Xoloitzcuintli). Other studies have suggested that the pre-colonial ancestry of the Chihuahua may be as high as 70%.
Colonial records refer to small, nearly hairless dogs at the beginning of the nineteenth century; one claims that sixteenth-century conquistadores found them plentiful in the region later known as Chihuahua. In a letter written in 1520, Hernan Cortés wrote that the Aztecs raised and sold little dogs as food.
The American Kennel Club first registered a Chihuahua in 1904, Midget, owned by H. Raynor of Texas.

Characteristics
Chihuahua breed standards specify an  “apple-shaped” skull, also referred to as an "apple-dome" conformation. Chihuahuas can appear in almost any coat color or pattern, ranging from solid to marked or splashed. Meaning the coat has an underlying darker color with scattered lighter patches. Apple-dome Chihuahuas have large, round eyes and large, erect ears, set in a high, dramatically rounded skull. Chihuahuas have a feature on their heads called the molera, which is a soft spot much like the fontanel found in human infants. It can be hard to see but is easy to feel by touch. The stop is well defined, forming a near-90-degree angle where the muzzle meets the skull. Dogs of the older "deer" type, with a flat-topped head, more widely set eyes, larger ears, and longer, more slender legs, may still be registered, but the deer head is not considered a separate type in competition and a deer-head dog's digression from the breed standard is considered a fault.
Breed standards for this dog do not generally specify a height; only a weight and a description of their overall proportions. Generally, the height ranges between 15 and 23 cm (6 and 9 in); some dogs grow to 30 to 38 cm (12 to 15 in).
The Fédération Cynologique Internationale standard calls for dogs ideally between 1.5 and 2.5 kg (3.3 and 5.5 lb); those outside the range 1.0–3.0 kg (2.2–6.6 lb) are disqualified from exhibition. The American breed standard sets a maximum weight of 2.7 kg (5.9 lb) for showing. In the British standard a weight of 1.8–2.7 kg (4–6 lb) is preferred – the clause "if two dogs are equally good in type, the more diminutive one is preferred" was removed in 2009.
Pet Chihuahuas, those bred or purchased primarily as companions rather than show dogs, often weigh more than the breed standard. Sometimes exceeding 4.5 kg (10 lb), particularly if they have heavier bone structures or are allowed to become overweight. This does not mean that they are not purebred Chihuahuas; they just do not meet the requirements to enter a conformation show. Chihuahuas do not breed true for size, and puppies from the same litter can mature in drastically different sizes from one another. Also, larger breeding females are less likely to experience dystocia (obstructed labor). Many breeders try to breed Chihuahuas to be as small as possible, because those marketed as "teacup" or "tiny teacup" demand higher prices.
The international standard disallows the merle coat pattern, which appears mottled. In 2007 The Kennel Club of Great Britain amended its breed standard to disqualify merle dogs because of the health risks associated with the underlying gene.
Like many other small dogs, the Chihuahua may display above-average aggression toward people and other dogs. According to the American Kennel Club, chihuahua's are not recommended for families with young children. However, they tend to be mildy good with other dogs but it can vary on the breed of the other dog.

Health
The Chihuahua has some genetic predisposition to several neurological diseases, among them atlantoaxial instability, ceroid lipofuscinosis, congenital deafness, congenital hydrocephalus, muscular dystrophy, necrotizing meningoencephalitis, and  neuroaxonal dystrophy; it has a mild predisposition to congenital heart disease. In a radiographical study of canine periodontal disease in 2001, the Chihuahua was found to have the lowest incidence of the six breeds studied. The predisposition to medial patellar luxation is believed to be significant.
Common health concerns in toy breeds, like the chihuahua, is the fact that they are especially prone to hypoglycemia because of their faster metabolism and greater energy demand relative to body weight, making them more vulnerable than larger breeds. Veterinarians often reccomend a half teapsoon of honey as this can be used as at home remedies for hypoglycaemia in less severe cases in puppies. Puppies are more suseptible to hypoglycemia if they are taken away from their mothers too soon. Breeders often give the chihuahua puppies this dose of honey daily to help wean them off of their mother and eventually onto dry food.
A 2018 study in Japan of pet cemetery data found the Chihuahua to have an average life expectancy of 11.8 years compared to 15.1 for crossbreeds and 13.7 overall. A 2022 UK study on life expectancy of dog breeds based on veterinary data showed the average life expectancy to be 7.91 for the breed compared to 11.82 years for crossbreeds. A 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 11.8 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds. A 2024 Italian study found a life expectancy of 8.5 years for the breed compared to 10 years overall.
A UK study found the Chihuahua bitch to be more than 10.4 times more likely to experience dystocia.

See also
List of dog breeds
Ren Hoek from Nickelodeon's The Ren & Stimpy Show
Techichi
Beverly Hills Chihuahua
Chihuahua (state)

Notes


== References ==