DLO Energy Resources Group (PTY) LTD is an independent power producer headquartered in Johannesburg, South Africa with primary operations in renewable energy, solar power and wind power. 
Established in 2011, the company currently oversees one of Africa’s largest wind farms located in the Northern Cape of South Africa; powering approximately 160,000 homes with carbon free solar power.
As of 2021, DLO Energy Resources Group has operations in two countries, including South Africa and Nigeria.

History
DLO Energy Resources group was founded by Linda Mabhena-Olagunju in 2011 and at the time was one of only two independent power producers (IPP) to be wholly owned by a black female in South Africa. The company has won multiple development bids through South Africa’s Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme (REIPPPP). In addition to South Africa, the company has projects under development in Nigeria and Botswana.
In 2019, DLO Energy Resources Group was selected to build and oversee a 30 MW solar park in Kaduna State, Nigeria. An agreement for the project was signed by Kaduna State Governor Nasir Ahmad el-Rufai and the company's founder, Linda Mabhena-Olagunju.
In 2020, DLO Energy Resources Group led a group donation totaling R600,000 to the National School of the Arts (NSA) located in Johannesburg, South Africa. The donation was an effort to pay student fees and help students facing financial challenges due to Covid-19.

Acquisition
The company announced the acquisition of Conco Energy Solutions in July 2021, becoming a level 1 BBBEE contributor and expanding its expertise in the EPC and O&M sector. Following the acquisition, the company also announced it will rebrand to DLO Energy Solutions.

Operations
The company currently oversees two renewable energy projects in South Africa. Both projects were won under round 3 of South Africa’s Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Programme with multiple others in development, including an off-grid solar PV plant in Northern Nigeria.

Wind Power
LONGYUAN MULILO DE AAR WIND POWER - 15 km South-West of De Aar, Northern Cape, South Africa
LONGYUAN MULILO DE AAR 2 NORTH - De Aar, Northern Cape, South Africa

Solar Power
DU PLESSIS SOLAR PV4 - South Africa
KADUNDA SOLAR PV - Kaduna, Nigeria

References
External links
Official Website
Solar Installation