Journal Citation Reports (JCR) is an annual publication by Clarivate. It has been integrated with the Web of Science and is accessed from the Web of Science Core Collection. It provides information about academic journals in the natural and social sciences, including impact factors. JCR was originally published as a part of the Science Citation Index. Currently, the JCR, as a distinct service, is based on citations compiled from the Science Citation Index Expanded and the Social Sciences Citation Index. As of the 2023 edition, journals from the Arts and Humanities Citation Index and the Emerging Sources Citation Index have also been included.

Basic journal information
The information given for each journal includes:

the basic bibliographic information of publisher,  title abbreviation, language, ISSN
the subject categories (there are 254 subject categories in the 2022 edition)

Citation information
Basic citation data:
the number of articles published during that year and
the number of times the articles in the journal were cited during the year by later articles in itself and other journals,
detailed tables showing
the number of times the articles in the journal were cited during the year by later articles in itself and other journals,
the number of citations made from articles published in the journal that year to it and other specific individual journals during each of the most recent ten years (the 20 journals most cited are included)
the number of times articles published in the journal during each of the most recent 10 years were cited by individual specific journals during the year (the twenty journals with the greatest number of citations are given)
and several measures derived from these data for a given journal: its impact factor, immediacy index, etc.
There are separate editions for the sciences and the social sciences; the 2013 science edition includes 8,411 journals, and the 2012 social science edition contains 3,016 titles. The issue for each year is published the following year after the citations for the year have been published and the information processed.
The publication is available online (JCR on the Web), or in CD format (JCR on CD-ROM); it was originally published in print, with the detailed tables on microfiche.
In general, various universities, administrative centers and ministries in charge of higher education make their evaluations of university professors and other researchers on the number and quality of articles published in journals indexed in the JCR.

Release schedule
In recent years, it has often been released in mid-June. The 2017 Journal Citation Reports, based on 2016 data, was released on June 14, 2017.

Integrations
In April 2020, Journal Citation Reports included a beta for open access data, which uses Unpaywall data. It officially left the beta phase with the release of the 2020 JCR in June 2020.

Impact factor
See also
Journal metrics
Scopus

References
Citations
Sources
Further reading
Krampl, Anna (15 April 2019). "Journal Citation Reports". Journal of the Medical Library Association. 107 (2). University Library System, University of Pittsburgh: 280–283. doi:10.5195/jmla.2019.646. ISSN 1558-9439. OCLC 8081616643. PMC 6466487.

External links
Official website
Training Resources for Journal Citation Reports