Miss World 2008 was the 58th edition of the Miss World pageant, held at the Sandton Convention Centre in Johannesburg, South Africa, on 13 December 2008.
Zhang Zilin of China crowned Ksenia Sukhinova of Russia as her successor at the end of the event. This is the second time Russia has won the title.

Background
Date and location
Originally, the pageant was going to take place in Kyiv, Ukraine, but because of the ongoing 2008 Russo-Georgian diplomatic crisis in neighbouring South Ossetia, the Miss World Organization decided to move the pageant away from Eastern Europe.

Selection of participants
Replacements
Janina San Miguel was replaced by first Runner-up of Binibining Pilipinas, Danielle Castaño due to Janina's personal decision to give up her crown.

Returns, and, withdrawals
This edition saw the return of Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Honduras, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Seychelles, Taiwan, Uruguay and Zambia; Seychelles, which last competed in 1999, Antigua and Barbuda, Egypt and Honduras in 2004, Taiwan in 2005 and Barbados, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Uruguay and Zambia in 2006.
Estonia, Grenada, Macedonia, Nepal, Panama, Romania, Slovenia and Suriname, withdrew from the competition.

Results
Placements
Continental Queens of Beauty
Winners were as follows:

Order of Announcements
Top 15

 Russia
 Mexico
 Barbados
 Iceland
 Trinidad and Tobago
 Venezuela
 Ukraine
 Croatia
 Brazil
 Angola
 Kazakhstan
 Puerto Rico
 Spain
 South Africa
 India
Top 5

 India
 Trinidad and Tobago
 Angola
 Russia
 South Africa

Contestants
Miss World 2008 had a total of 109 contestants.

Judges
Miss World 2008 contestants were judged based upon the criteria of glamour, beauty, intelligence and poise. Some of the judges were representatives of the Miss World Organization. Some of the contestants, such as Ksenia Sukhinova, communicated with the judges using a translator. Judges for the event were:

Julia Morley – Chairwoman of the Miss World Organization.
Wilnelia Merced – Miss World 1975 from Puerto Rico
Aminurta Kang – Theatre stage director, China and North America
Krish Naidoo – International ambassador for Miss World
Pearl Luthuli – Group executive public commercial services SABC
Lindiwe Mahlangu – Chief executive of the Joburg Tourism Company
Precious Moloi-Motsepe – Chairperson of African Fashion International
Graham Cooke – President of World Travel

Notes
Designations
Thailand – Miss Thailand World was not held this year due to the death of Princess Galyani Vadhana, the elder sister of then King Bhumibol Adulyadej, so the previous year's 1st runner-up, Ummarapas Jullakasian represented Thailand.

Replacements
Egypt – Meriam George was replaced by Sanaa Ismail Hamed at the last minute for some undisclosed reasons.
 Hong Kong – Miss Hong Kong 2008 winner Edelweiss Cheung was replaced by the 1st runner-up, Skye Chan.
 Sweden – Jennifer Palm Lundberg placed 3rd Runner-up in the Miss World Sweden pageant, but won the title when each of the original top three placers declined the crown after disagreements over the winner's contract.
 Vietnam – Miss Vietnam 2008 Trần Thị Thùy Dung was not allowed to compete after she was found ineligible. The 1st Runner-up Phan Hoàng Minh Thư and the 2nd Runner-up Nguyễn Thụy Vân also were not allowed to compete. After that, Dương Trương Thiên Lý, the 2nd Runner-up of Miss Universe Vietnam 2008 was designated to represent Vietnam.

Withdrawals
 Estonia – Due to lack of funding and sponsorship
 Macedonia – Suzana Al-Salkini withdrew due to lack of funding and sponsorship, but she did compete the following year at Miss World 2009.
   Nepal – The organiser of the Miss Nepal pageant said it was postponing the contest scheduled for 23 August 2008 to an unknown date, after the Maoist women's wing, which has trained its sights on Miss Nepal, announced a Kathmandu Valley shutdown on the day to prevent the event.
 Panama – Kathya Saldaña had problems with the regional organisation and didn't obtain a South African visa in time.
 Romania – Due to lack of funding and sponsorship
 Slovenia – Due to lack of funding and sponsorship
 Suriname – Mireille Nederbiel was not allowed to compete in Miss World by the decision of pageant organizers.


== References ==