An academic discipline or field of study is a branch of study, taught and researched as part of higher education. A scholar's discipline is commonly defined by the university faculties and learned societies to which they belong and the academic journals in which they publish research.
Disciplines vary between well-established ones in almost all universities with well-defined rosters of journals and conferences and nascent ones supported by only a few universities and publications. A discipline may have branches, which are often called sub-disciplines.
The following outline provides an overview of and topical guide to academic disciplines. In each case, an entry at the highest level of the hierarchy (e.g., Humanities) is a group of broadly similar disciplines; an entry at the next highest level (e.g., Music) is a discipline having some degree of autonomy and being the fundamental identity felt by its scholars. Lower levels of the hierarchy are sub-disciplines that do generally not have any role in the title of the university's governance. The proper criteria for organizing knowledge into disciplines is open to debate.

Humanities
Performing arts
Visual arts
History
Also regarded as a Social science

Languages and literature
Linguistics listed in Social science

Law
Also regarded as a Social science

Philosophy
Also regarded as the separate, an entry at the highest level of the hierarchy

Religious studies
Also regarded as a social science

Divinity
Theology
Religion
Social science
Anthropology
Archaeology
Business
Economics
Futurology
(also known as future studies or prospective studies)
Main articles: Outline of futures studies and Futures studies

Geography
Linguistics
Also regarded as a formal science

Political science
Psychology
Sociology
Interdisciplinary studies
Area studies
Ethnic and cultural studies
Organizational studies
Natural science
Physical Science
Space sciences
Astronomy
Physics
Chemistry
Earth science
Life science
Biology
Formal science
Computer science
Also a branch of electrical engineering

Logic
Mathematical logic
Set theory
Proof theory
Model theory
Recursion theory
Modal logic
Intuitionistic logic
Philosophical logic
Logical reasoning
Modal logic
Deontic logic
Doxastic logic
Logic in computer science
Programming language semantics
Formal methods (Formal verification)
Type theory
Logic programming
Multi-valued logic
Fuzzy logic

Mathematics
Pure mathematics
Applied mathematics
Statistics
Applied science
Agriculture
Architecture and design
Education
Engineering and technology
Chemical engineering
Civil engineering
Educational technology
Electrical engineering
Materials science
Mechanical engineering
Systems science
Environmental studies and forestry
Family and consumer science
Human physical performance and recreation
Journalism, media studies and communication
Library and museum studies
Medicine and health
Military sciences
Public administration
Public policy
Social work
Transportation
See also
Notes
Further reading
Abbott, Andrew (2001). Chaos of Disciplines. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-00101-2.
Oleson, Alexandra; Voss, John (1979). The Organization of knowledge in modern America, 1860–1920. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-2108-8.
US Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences. Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP). National Center for Education Statistics.

External links
Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP 2000): Developed by the U.S. Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics to provide a taxonomic scheme that will support the accurate tracking, assessment, and reporting of fields of study and program completions activity.
Complete JACS (Joint Academic Classification of Subjects) from Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) in the United Kingdom
Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC 2008) (web-page Archived 2010-12-12 at the Wayback Machine) Chapter 3 and Appendix 1: Fields of research classification.
Fields of Knowledge, a zoomable map allowing the academic disciplines and sub-disciplines in this article be visualised.
Sandoz, R. (ed.), Interactive Historical Atlas of the Disciplines, University of Geneva