The Toy Fox Terrier is a small terrier breed of dog, directly descended from the larger Smooth Fox Terrier but since 1936, it has been registered in the United States with the UKC as a separate breed.

Description
Appearance
Toy Fox Terriers are small dogs with a muscular and athletic appearance. Notable characteristic traits include a short glossy and predominantly white coat, coupled with a predominantly solid head, and a short, high-set tail. The breed has been deemed elegant and graceful with V-shaped ears and large eyes. The tail can be short and straight or long and shiny, and breeders often shorten the tail a few days after birth by clipping it about three-fifths of the way from the tip (at the third or fourth joint). The coat is short, fine, and glossy in black  with tan, with areas of tan on the face; there are two other variants, one with 'chocolate' replacing the black in areas (the UKC does not allow this variant to be shown), another which is all white with tan and no black at all, and one which is white with black markings and no tan accents. These variants are often known as 'Tri-Color', 'Chocolate', and 'White and Tan', and 'White and Black" respectively. The height ranges from 8.5–11.5 inches at the shoulder (21.5–29.2 cm) and weight from 3.5–9 kg.

Temperament
Toy Fox Terriers were used commonly in circus shows by clowns, and they are said to make great companions for owners with a good sense of humor. As a terrier breed, they are often active, though perhaps not as active as the Jack Russell Terrier, and are said to be well suited for older owners. They are quite trainable and often cited as making wonderful companions for people with disabilities. They are also very lovable and loyal to their owners. In addition, dogs of this breed tend not to bark very much if they are trained well.

Health
A 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 12.9 years from a sample of 52 deaths for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.
Toy Fox Terriers, like other toy breeds are prone to patellar luxation (slipped stifle), Legg–Calvé–Perthes syndrome and von Willebrand disease.

History
Some Toy Fox Terrier breeders can trace their dogs' lineage back to a Smooth Fox Terrier called "Foiler", the first fox terrier registered by the Kennel Club in Britain, circa 1875–76. It is believed that careful breeding from smaller Smooth Fox Terriers without crosses to other toy breeds such as Manchester Terrier and Chihuahua resulted in the Toy Fox Terrier of today.
Toy Fox Terriers were recognized by the United Kennel Club (UKC) in 1936 and placed in the Terrier Group, and by the American Kennel Club (AKC) in 2003 (Toy Group).

See also
Dogs portal
List of dog breeds
Fox Terrier, for additional details on history, genetics, coat color, etc.
Rare breeds

References
Bibliography
Davidson, John F., The Toy Fox Terrier - Wired for Action (a 2006 revision of The Toy Fox Terrier)
Hopkins, Eliza and Flamholtz, Cathy The Toy Fox Terrier
Bielsky-Braham, Tanya, Send in the Clowns. AKC Gazette, December, 2002
Sherry Baker Krueger, Toy Fox Terrier, T.F.H. PUBLICATIONS, 1993 ISBN 0-86622-868-3


== External links ==